[MUSIC PLAYING]
Hi, I'm Jay Weidner.
And today, we're
talking to Stephen
Simon, producer, director,
and Hollywood child actually.
And this is going to be a
really fun conversation.
Steven is the son of a
director, Sylvan Simon,
who made 46 films
in 13 years, which
I'm really impressed with.
And we're going to
have a conversation
about history of
Hollywood, new Hollywood,
and spiritual Hollywood.
So how you doing today, Stephen.
-Good.
It's good to see you.
Yeah, it's good to see you too.
And I read your book--
-Thank you.
---this weekend.
Wonderful book.
And I did not know any of
the stuff that was in there,
I don't think.
I knew a little bit about
your "Somewhere in Time"
experiences and Chris
Reeves, and all that.
But I had no idea
your father was
a top director in Hollywood,
worked for Harry Cohn.
And why don't you tell
us about your dad?
Well, my dad, Sylvan Simon,
was a director and a producer
in Hollywood in the '40s.
He actually came out
to LA in the '30s
and made movies with-- he
made a lot of comedies.
He made movies with Red
Skelton, who was his best friend
and collaborator, who I wound up
calling Uncle Red as I grew up.
And Milton Berle, I was
probably the first person
to call-- or one of them
to call him Uncle Milty,
because I was supposed to call
all of my dad's friends uncle.
But he was friends with the
Marx Brothers and Milton Berle
and Abbott and Costello.
And all of those folks wound
up at our house-- I remember,
when I was three, four
years old-- on Sundays.
So my dad made a movie
with Lana Turner.
And my dad also bought
"From Here to Eternity,"
the novel that wound up
saving Frank Sinatra's career.
I'm not sure how much of that
story you want to get into.
Oh, I want to get into that.
I'm not going to let
you go that easy.
But let's get back to your
dad before we get into that,
because he made-- I've seen at
least two of your dad's films.
I saw "The Fuller Brush Man."
And I saw "The Fuller Brush
Woman," which I thought
was better, by the way.
I thought that--
With Lucy.
---Lucille Ball, her comedy
on that movie really--
I think that's
probably what aged
her and got her career going.
That was one of her
first launches, yeah.
And I haven't seen
a lot of the others.
I looked up his filmography.
I probably have, because I
was a film freak as a kid
and watched everything on TV.
You didn't see Abbott
and Costello in Hollywood?
Oh, I saw all of them.
Gosh, those, of course.
They were great.
So your dad was a
really hard-working guy.
Anyone who does that many
films in that short of time--
Nowadays, if you could
do two films in a year,
it'd be amazing.
Yeah, but almost nobody
does two films each yeah.
Spielberg
occasionally tries it.
Everyone once in a while,
but usually it's one.
But back then, it
was a different--
that was the studio system.
And you went from one film to
another film to another film.
And it wasn't like you
chose your films the way
they do today.
You were kind of
assigned your movies.
And you kind of
went and did that.
There was A units and B unit.
And remember, the '30s,
when my dad started,
1939 was the high
watermark for Hollywood.
650 movies were made in 1939.
The greatest year
for cinema ever, 1939.
"Gone with the
Wind," "Wizard of Oz."
Yep.
There's a Ford movie
in there, "Stagecoach."
"Stagecoach," yes, right.
And so he was right
there at the peak, when
LA was really the
nicest city in America,
and movies where the best.
And let's talk about the studio
system, because I'm really-- I
think I would have fit well
into the studio system.
Me too.
You know, because it
gave you the creativity.
But it gave you the security
that they don't have now.
And I think that
insecurity that Hollywood
has now adds a lot
to the kind of fear
kind of movies that they make.
I often wonder what a
historian 500 years from now,
looking at movies from the '30s,
and then movies from the '70s,
and then movies from today,
would think about what happened
to this country that
produced these movies,
because the movies are so
wildly different than they
were in the '30s and '40s.
Can you talk about that?
Sure.
For lack of a gentler
way of putting it,
the inmates took
over the asylum.
What happened was, during
that period of time,
during the heyday of Hollywood,
the titans-- Irving Thalberg,
Harry Cohn,-- even though he
was a pretty horrible man,
as I talk about in my book, made
great movies-- Darryl Zanuck,
and all of those people,
they-- and particularly,
Louis B. Mayer, the people
that ran the studios.
And they ran them
with an iron fist.
They knew exactly
what they wanted.
But these people loved movies.
That was their passion.
That's why they came from New
York in 1915, 1920, '25, '30,
and started to make movies,
because they loved movies.
And they loved movie people.
And they lived it.
And they breathed it.
And they understood the
creative risk it was.
They knew how to
deal with actors.
deal with directors.
And that was a
time, when I said,
if you signed to a
studio, they told you what
movie you were going to make.
And you went.
I would have loved
that period of time
too, because you went from
movie to movie to movie.
And you did the best.
Some of them didn't work out,
but it didn't really matter,
because you kept working.
What happened in the
'50s-- and I mean,
this is a much longer
story than you're
going to want to go into today.
But what happened in the
'50s is that Jimmy Stewart--
and he was the first one-- got
a profit percentage on a movie.
And then it started to shift
because the old, powerful
moguls started to move away.
They started to get older.
They started to retire
and started to die.
And the people who
came in behind them
were more business-oriented
and not really focused
on the creative
aspect of movies.
The best example is during
that period of time MGM,
Louis B. Mayer would
say, all right.
We're making a movie.
And if his marketing
person would say to him,
well, I'm not really sure how
to market this movie Mr. Mayer,
he'd say, fine.
You don't have a job today.
You're fired.
I'll get somebody else tomorrow
who's going to market it.
This is the movie we're making.
Today, the marketing people
have basically veto power--
The veto powers.
---over what happens.
Again, it's much more
a corporate mentality.
You know, I know a
lot of the people that
are still there,
because I spent 25, 30
years making Hollywood movies.
The whole corporate
mentality has taken over.
And the cost has
become so exorbitant.
It's over $100 million to
make an average Hollywood
movie today.
And all the marketing money--
it's a different business.
You know, they're
going for the home run.
They're going for the
Burger King tie-in.
And the littler move,
the story-driven movie,
the movie that's about
real human beings
and about real people,
it's just harder
and harder to do that today.
Yeah, I read a book recently
by Edward Jay Epstein
about Hollywood and
how they're really
only interested in selling
popcorn now at theaters.
So since people our
age aren't generally
going to buy a bunch of
candy bars and popcorn,
they have to make
movies that appeal
to people between 15 and 25.
That's it.
And let's face it,
that's not exactly
your most formative years.
So that's why the
quality of the movies
has dropped rapidly actually.
-Oh, it has.
And they've stopped making
movies for every audience
spectrum too.
What happens is the last three
months of the year, October,
November, December, we
start getting movies that
have some significance to
them, some meat on their bones,
some spirituality to them,
some real drama, because that's
qualifying for Academy Awards.
It used to be that
those movies were
opened all during the year.
Now, it's only about
three months a year.
So what happens
is folks like you
and I have gotten out of the
habit of going to movies.
I'll never get out of
the habit, because it's
my passion and my addiction.
But a lot of people have
gotten out of the habit
of going to movies.
And then, when all these movies
come out at the same time,
they can't go see all of them.
A lot of them fail.
And then it's a
self-fulfilling prophecy.
Well, you see,
the older audience
doesn't really want the movies.
---make it.
They didn't go.
But you shoved 50
films at us at once.
And we can only go once
a week or twice a week.
So they're guaranteed to fail.
And that's why you see so
many remakes getting made.
I mean, in 2012, they just
made a remake of "Spiderman,"
the original "Spiderman."
The original was only
made 15, 16 years ago.
I don't think it was that long.
Was it?
I think was the late '90s.
Maybe it was even 2000.
The original was only
10, 12, 15 years ago.
But they had to
make another one.
Why?
Because they have a new
generation of 12, 13, 14,
15-year-olds, who will
go back and see the movie
over and over and over again.
And that's why you
get, frankly,--
forgive my language--
so much crap,
because the people who are
running the studios today,
many of whom are well-meaning
people, are MBAs.
They're really
about the business.
And show business is both.
It is a business.
It's always been a business.
But it's about show as well.
It's about creativity.
And it's about taking risks.
It's about taking chances,
and pushing the envelope,
and giving people
something that they really
relate to in their hearts.
And we're getting very
little of that nowadays.
Yeah, my agent in
Los Angeles told me
that he's not quite sure-- I
won't mention his name so I
don't get him in
trouble-- he's not
quite sure if the people
running the studios
know how to read anymore.
Oh, I don't think they do.
Because he says he
gives them scripts,
and he can tell they
haven't read it.
And they're going for graphic
novels and comics, something
that's easy for them
to grasp and understand
and quick to read.
And they're only picking--
there's not that many original
screenplays anymore either.
Everything's a derivative now.
-It is.
But that's when
you see something--
and I know we'll talk
about more current movies,
but now when you see something
like "Silver Linings Notebook,"
which is out this year,
which is so incredibly
original and daring
and creative and smart,
it's like, oh my god, they
still do make movies like that.
But not very often.
And then you get
to the directors.
And they don't have, like
your dad directing so much.
You become very
familiar with the tools.
And you can't possibly--
Spielberg can,
because he made enough films.
But you really have
to make four or five
films before you
really start figuring
out the language of film.
Yeah, that's absolutely true.
And then it's really
hard for anyone.
I mean, even you.
You should have
been able to make
eight or nine, 10, 12 films.
And you never did.
-As a director?
As a director.
Yeah, as a
director, I made two.
As a producer,
I've done about 20.
Yeah.
You've had a good
producing career.
First, you worked with
Dino De Laurentiis
and Ray Stark, and
all the top people,
which we'll get to soon.
Let's get back to your
dad, because your dad
is incredibly fascinating.
Your dad bought
the book property
"From Here to Eternity."
He did, indeed.
And thus began one
of the biggest dramas
in Hollywood history.
It sure did.
Why don't you tell
us your view on that,
because the way you found
out about this is shocking.
It's a pretty
extraordinary story.
So here's what happened.
My dad bought, "From Here
to Eternity," as a book.
James Jones was the author.
They paid $50,000
for it, which was
an enormous amount of money.
This was 1949 that they
actually made the purchase.
They started
developing the movie.
And my sister, who
is a film critic
actually back East,
now, Susan Granger,
remembers this very well.
I was three or four at the time.
So I don't remember it well.
But Susie was almost
12, and James Jones
was in the house a lot.
My dad was a huge
Frank Sinatra fan.
And what a lot of
people don't know
is that Sinatra, at
the end of the '40s,
was very much down
in his career.
He had hemorrhaged
his vocal cords.
He really wasn't singing,
couldn't really sing.
He'd made, as he later explained
it to me, a couple of really
bad movie decisions,
where the movies had gone
into the toilet, as he said.
And he really was down
on his luck in many ways.
And my dad called him
in and said, look,
we've bought this book.
The part of Maggio in
this is great for you.
I'd love you to
be in this movie.
And my dad, at that point,
was an executive, a producer,
and the head of production
at Columbia under Harry
Cohn, who ran the studio.
So Sinatra read the book,
called my dad, said,
I'd love to do this.
Dad said, great.
I'd be thrilled to
have you in the movie.
Dad was going to
produce the movie.
And Harry Cohn
vetoed him and said,
no, Sinatra does not work here.
He's not going to get the job.
My dad called Sinatra and
said, I can't do this.
And Harry vetoed me.
And I'm resigning.
And my dad quit the studio
that day and went home.
Right on.
Next day, he got a panicked
phone call from Harry Cohn,
saying, come back.
Give Sinatra what he wants.
All right.
Fade out.
So my dad, unfortunately,
after that,
within six months of that, had
a cerebral hemorrhage and died.
And it was just before
my fifth birthday.
And Dad was just 40.
And I remember it.
From my fifth or
sixth birthday on,
I started getting
these incredible gifts
from Uncle Frank.
And that's what I was
told to call Sinatra.
And every year for my
birthday, for Christmas,
I'd get these great gifts.
When I was 18
years old, so 1964,
I got called to Sinatra's
house up in the hills
above Beverly Hills.
And he's standing
in his driveway,
sitting, leaning on the
hood of a 1964 Corvette,
silver Corvette Stingray.
And I pull into the driveway.
And he flips me the keys.
And he says, happy
birthday, kid.
And I said, what?
And he said, it's yours.
And I was like, really?
He said, yeah, it's yours.
He said, come in.
We're going to talk.
So I went into his house.
It's where I first met Jilly
Rizzo, who many people may know
as a restaurant tour
leader, but who was really
Frank's right-hand
guy and a Damon
Runyon character
from day one, just
an extraordinary character.
And Frank explained the story
to me in the following way.
He said, you know, listen.
Your dad was a
real stand-up guy.
He got me this part.
This part changed
everything for me.
Sinatra wound up winning
the Academy Award for it,
getting best supporting
actor for it.
And he said, it changed
my whole career.
It resurrected my whole career.
And your dad really
stood up for me at a time
that very few people would.
And I never got a
chance to repay him.
That's why I'm here for you.
That's why I've given
you all these gifts.
Now, I'm 18.
This happened 14 years before.
And he said to me, here's
a card with my phone
number, my private
secretary, my number.
Any time you get
into trouble,-- and
if you think I'm going to
tell that story on television,
I'm not.
-Good.
I wouldn't ask.
By the way, it's in
the book, "Bringing
Back the Old Hollywood."
You can read it in the book.
But I'm not telling that story.
It's very scandalous.
I eventually did
get into trouble.
But Sinatra was there.
I mean, he took me to Vegas.
He took me everywhere.
And he did it until I
was in my late '20s.
So for about 25 years, Sinatra
really saw part of his role
as being kind of a
surrogate father.
He said, I want you to
see me as a godfather.
I had no idea what that
meant at that time.
This is way before
"The Godfather."
And he was, as many
people have said,
one of the most charismatic,
extraordinary people.
And I was privileged to spend
20, 25 years of my life hanging
out with him from time to time.
We were never friends.
He never confided in me.
He was an idol to me, like
he was to other people.
But it was an extraordinary
experience of my life.
[BELL RINGING]
[APPLAUSE]
Ah, isn't that nice?
All right.
Start talking.
Uh, I was sent by a
friend of Johnny Fontaine.
His friend is my client,
who would give his undying
friendship to Mr.
Woltz if Mr. Woltz
would grant us a small favor.
Woltz is listening.
Give Johnny the part
in the new war film
you're starting next week.
--[CHUCKLES] And, uh, what favor
would your friend grant Mr.
Woltz?
You're gonna have
some union problems.
My client could
make them disappear.
Also, one of your top
stars has just moved
from marijuana to heroine.
-Are you trying to muscle me?
-Absolutely not.
Now, listen to me you smooth
talking son of a bitch!
Let me lay it on
the line for you
and your boss, whoever he is.
Johnny Fontaine will
never get that movie!
I don't care how many daigo
guinea wop greaseball gumbahs
come out of the woodwork!
I'm German-Irish.
Well, let me tell you
something my Kraut-Mick friend.
I'm gonna make so
much trouble for you
you won't know what hit ya.
Mr. Woltz, I'm a lawyer.
I have not threatened you.
I know almost every
big lawyer in New York.
Who the hell are you?
I have a special practice.
I handle one client.
Now, you have my number.
I'll wait for your call.
By the way, I admire
your pictures very much.
-Check him out.
-All right.
So one of the best movies
ever made, "The Godfather,"
by Francis Ford Coppola.
And your father was one of
the central dramas in that.
So the story for me ends 1968.
I'm 22 years old by that time.
And Sinatra had a
house in Palm Springs
that I used to go to
from time to time,
be privileged to go
to from time to time.
He invited me down.
We would fly to Vegas
from time to time.
And I was in Palm Springs.
And I went to a movie
theater in Palm Springs
and saw Red Skelton,
who, I mentioned before,
had been my dad's best
friend and collaborator.
And I hadn't seen
him, and he hadn't
seen me since I was four.
So now, it's been 18 years.
I found out later
there was a big
falling out between him and my
mother after my father died.
And I don't know
why, but there was.
And Red kind of
disappeared from my life.
So I knew he wouldn't
know who I was.
But I felt compelled.
And I went up to him, and I
said, excuse me, Mr. Skelton.
And he looked at me with
big tears in his eyes.
You know, he was a very
emotional guy, Red Skelton.
And he said, my god.
Your Sylvan's boy.
So I assume I looked
a lot like my dad.
And I said, yeah, I am.
And he said, what
are you doing here?
Let's talk.
And we went-- he was with his
wife Georgia at that time.
And they were still
together at that time.
We went to a coffee shop
or a little restaurant
near the theater.
And he asked me
what I was doing.
And I said, well, I've spent
a lot of time with Sinatra,
and blah, blah, blah.
And he kind of
looked at his wife.
And he said, well, how much
do you know about that story?
And I said, I just
know that dad got him
the part, and stuff like that.
And he said, well
you know, maybe it's
time you knew the whole story.
And I was like, well,
what is the whole story?
So this is the way Red
explained it to me.
Now, I have no firsthand
knowledge of this.
This is just what
Red Skelton told me.
It was 1968.
But he told me that Sinatra had
gotten this role, that Harry
Cohn went crazy, that there
was an issue with Sinatra
and a young woman whom
they both coveted.
And that's why my dad quit.
Well, even though
Mario Puzo and Coppola
had it being as dramatic as
a horse's head being cut off,
according to Red, what
happened is that Harry Cohn did
own a racehorse, a very
prominent racehorse.
And that night, the horse
was poisoned in its stall.
Now, there was a note put under
Harry Cohn's door in his house,
which basically
said, you're next.
And that's what scared him.
And then he freaked out.
And that's when my dad-- as Red
said to me, as far as he knows,
my dad never actually
really even knew the story
that that's what had happened.
He was just kind
of brought back in.
And he died so
quickly afterwards
that he probably did not know.
And I don't know that that
story is exactly what happened.
But I do know this, Red Skelton
told me that story with a lot
of heart and a lot of passion.
And he said there was a
reason that Sinatra treated
me the way he did for 25 years.
And then I later went
to Ray Stark, who was
a dear friend of my parents.
And Ray Stark had produced
"Funny Girl" and "Funny Lady."
And he had actually
been my dad's protege.
Ray was one of the great
producers in the film industry.
And when I got into
the film industry,
I actually started
working for him.
But this is many years before.
And I went to Ray.
And I said, Ray, Red
told me this story.
Is this true?
And he said, as far
as I know, yeah.
He said, but I don't
think anybody's
ever going to confirm it.
But he said, from what
I know and from what
I know from the people
at Columbia at that time,
and from what Red
told me and told
your dad, yeah, that's true.
So what was your
reaction when you first
saw the movie, "The Godfather?"
-I was shocked.
I'll bet.
I was shocked, because when
the moment came that I got
in that trouble that Frank,
to his great delight,
got me out of, he and Jilly
were kind of-- I said,
well, how did you do this?
And he kind of winked at Jilly
and said, well, I made the guy
an offer he couldn't refuse.
I had no idea what that meant,
because that was also 1968.
'69.
When the movie came
out, I was shocked.
Now, I have to say,
in all fairness
here, Frank hated that.
He hated being Johnny Fontaine.
He said it wasn't true.
He said there were so
many things in that movie
that weren't true.
He really hated being
portrayed that way.
So I, for many--
I mean, I would've
never talked about this until
long after Frank's death.
I would have never done
anything to embarrass
him, because I'm
just so grateful
to him and to his family.
And Tina and Nancy
were-- I'm not
going to say close
friends of mine,
but they were certainly
people that I knew
and that I would
consider friendly with.
But it's been a long enough
time now that I felt that it was
really appropriate for
me to tell the story,
because it's a wonderful
Hollywood story.
Oh, it's incredible.
I wonder where Mario Puzo got
all of this knowledge now.
Because obviously, he
was onto something.
Yes.
Those are good films.
But they're not great films.
So Harry Cohn, he
got your dad started.
And then that got you
going into movies.
And you went to
work for Ray Stark.
I did.
And then after that
stint, you decided
to buy a property from one of
my favorite writers, Richard
Matheson.
-I did.
I actually begged my way in.
I was a lawyer.
[WHISPERING] I was a lawyer.
-I can't believe it.
--[WHISPERING] I don't
talk about that a lot.
I don't have to go
to meetings anymore.
It's been a long time.
And no one would ever want
me as a lawyer then or now.
No lawyer jokes.
No, no lawyer jokes.
I spent a very brief
period of time as a lawyer.
But I knew I wanted to get
into the film industry.
It was just in my blood.
And I went into a
bookstore in Beverly
Hills, called Martindale's,
which is long since gone.
And the book clerk said,
you should read this book,
because I know you
like Richard Matheson.
And it was a book called
"Bid Time Return."
And I read this book.
And I said, OK, now I've got
to get into the film industry.
And I went to Ray
Stark, who had been
my dad's protege, who was a
very close friend of my mother.
And Ray's wife,
Fran, who is Fanny
Brice's daughter--
that's how Ray
got the idea for "Funny Girl."
Fanny Brice and my mother
were very close friends.
And I went to Ray, and I
begged him to give me a job.
And I said, I've read this book.
I need to start getting
into the film industry.
Ray was very hesitant, because
my mother was a Jewish mother.
He was a good friend.
And he said to me, so you
want me to tell, Harriet,
your mother, that I am
taking her Jewish son out
of the practice
of law and putting
him in the movie business.
And I said, yeah.
And he was like--
he made me a deal.
And we started.
And I developed "Smokey
and the Bandit,"
which was my first film
that I'd ever worked on.
And I worked on the
"Goodbye Girl"--
Huge hit.
But the very first thing I
did was call Richard Matheson.
And I have to say,
for those of you
who may not know
the name Richard
Matheson, Richard wrote so many
great books-- "I Am Legend."
He wrote this book,
"Bid Time Return."
He wrote other books as well.
Also the real good episodes
of "The Twilight Zone."
He wrote about a third of
"The Twilight Zone" episodes.
The good ones.
Some really great ones.
And he wrote Steven
Spielberg's first movie,
"Duel," which really kind
of shot Spielberg in.
And the very first thing
I did on my very first day
in the film industry was to
call Richard Matheson's agent,
set up a lunch with him,
meet him, and tell him
I had read this book and that
if he gave me a couple of years,
I'd figure out a way
to produce the film.
And then three years
later, that wound up
being "Somewhere in Time."
And that wound up being my
first film as a producer
and the first of two films that
I collaborated with Richard on.
That and then "What Dreams
May Come," 20 years later.
And Richard became kind
of my spiritual mentor
and a surrogate father to me.
Well, like they say, if
you want to be successful,
start with a good script.
And definitely, Richard Matheson
is one of the best writers,
I think, America's
ever produced.
He's one of the
great storytellers.
Yeah, I was
watching an interview
with Ridley Scott and Charlie
Rose, I think, a few years ago.
And Charlie Rose said,
what's the hardest
part about making a movie?
And Ridley Scott said
something I'll never forget.
He said, writing the script.
And Richard Matheson wrote
some really good scripts.
-He did.
So you made your first
significant film,
"Somewhere in Time," which
is now a cult classic--
It is.
---and a really good film.
And you know what another
definition of a cult classic
is?
-Huh?
A movie that bombed
when it came out,--
Yeah, but now
people remember it.
Which "Somewhere in Time" did.
And it really kind of totally
broke all of our hearts.
It broke my heart.
I grew this.
When "Somewhere
in Time" bombed, I
kind of went into my
house for two months,
and didn't come
out, and grew this.
And I've never shaved it since.
That's what Al Gore did after
he lost the election in 2000.
Well, that's what I felt like.
I felt like I'd really kind
of-- I have to tell you,
speaking of that,
Michael Cimino,
who was a wonderful director,
who made "Deer Hunter,"
made a film called
"Heaven's Gate,"--
Which they're now
digitally redoing.
---which is known to be one of
the great bombs in the history
of the film industry.
Which is actually
a pretty good film.
It's a really,
really good film.
But it destroyed United
Artists when he made it.
And this is when I was
working with Ray Stark.
And I remember being
a big fan of his.
And I had dinner
with him one night.
And we were talking
about "Heaven's Gate."
And I said to him,
Michael, what did
that feel like when
that all just fell
apart after the "Deer Hunter?"
And it was just chilling.
He said, you know
what I felt like?
I felt like Houdini might
have felt, wrapped in chains,
thrown to the
bottom of the river,
and when you get to the
you forget the trick.
And he said, I kind
of forgot the trick.
And I never forgot that.
I thought that was just
an extraordinary thing.
Yeah, he got
really unnecessarily
burned by that whole thing.
I only saw it once, but it
was really a very good film.
-It was.
-It came out at the wrong time.
Reagan had just got elected.
It was kind of a subversive plot
about the rich cattle barons.
And I just don't think he
ever could have had a chance
in that political atmosphere.
-Well, and listen.
Also, sometimes--
"Somewhere in Time"
came out at the wrong time.
It came out in the
"Saturday Night Fever"
era, and things like that.
And it was a little movie
out of place and out of time.
A little slow.
It was a very, very slow.
It was purposely done that way
to be a kind 1940s melodrama,
the way it was done.
And there's a wonderful story--
and I don't know if you want
to get into it-- about how we
got Chris Reeve for that film,
but it really wound
up being something
that I was incredibly proud of.
It was the kind of movie
that I really wanted to make
from the time I was a kid.
You know, I grew up on movies
like "Lost Horizons" and things
like that.
I love those films, which
Hollywood called fantasy films,
but what I really thought
as spiritual films.
And that's really why when I
read "Bid Time Return," which
became "Somewhere in Time,"
why I wanted so desperately
to make that as my first film.
And it is a wonderful
spiritual love story.
And it did take some
time for it to catch on.
It bombed when it came out.
The critics were waiting
for Chris with sharp knives.
And they went after him.
It was horrible.
And the film disappeared for
maybe three or four years.
And it's interesting
what happened
with it, because
I always thought
it was a wonderful love story.
All of us involved
loved the film.
And we never could quite
figure out why it happened.
But things happen the
way they're supposed to.
And a young guy in LA
named Jerry Harvey--
and I don't know if you
ever knew Jerry Harvey-- was
the programmer for one of the
very first pay cable channels
ever called the Z Channel.
Oh, Z Channel,--
Z Channel was one--
---the single greatest
channel that ever existed.
He was just a genius.
And he loved
"Somewhere in Time."
He had been one of the few
people to see in the theater.
So when he got the Z Channel--
He put it on all the time.
---he started putting--
and then HBO picked it up.
And it got a life of its own.
And got a call from
Universal maybe six,
seven years after the
film came out, saying,
what is going on
with your movie?
All of a sudden, we're
selling videocassettes.
And then a guy named Bill
Shepard, who worked at Hughes
Aircraft, called Richard
Matheson and I one day
and said, I want to start
a fan club for this movie.
And I'm going to
call it INSIGHT,
the International Network of
Somewhere in Time Enthusiasts.
And he started a fan club, which
is still going on to this day.
They publish a quarterly
newsletter about the film.
Now this is a film
that's now 32 years old.
And every October, at the end
of October, at the Grand Hotel,
where we shot the
film, the fan club
takes over the entire
hotel for a whole weekend.
Like "Lord of the
Rings" or something.
And people come dressed
in 1912 costumes.
And there are trivia contests.
And they show the film.
And it's a weekend devoted.
So those of you who have always
loved "Somewhere in Time,"
I just want you know
that-- go to the Grand
Hotel website, grandhotel.com.
And you want to go to the
"Somewhere in Time" weekend.
You'll have a-- and
it's really wonderful.
I went there finally for the
first time about 10 years ago.
And the state of Michigan
had gotten together
with the local people and had
put a plaque down where Chris
Reeve first meets Jane Seymour.
And it says on this plaque, on
this place on June 28, 1912--
which was the time in the
film-- Richard Collier first
met Elise McKenna.
And it's on a permanent
place in the film.
And I remember going down
there for the first time
and just sitting
down there and really
crying, because it took so
long for the film to catch on.
But now-- and it's not like it's
ever going to be a huge hit.
But boy, the people
who love it really do.
And frankly, I would rather
make films that people either
love or hate.
I think the worst
thing is to make a film
that people say, oh, it was OK.
Then you haven't done anything.
And I've made some
movies that people hate.
And there are people who
just find "Somewhere in Time"
boring and pretentious,
and all kinds of things.
And I respect that.
But I'm so proud of that.
And then "What Dreams May
Come" is a whole other story.
Yeah.
Well, it holds up really well.
I watched it a few months ago.
It really holds up really well.
It doesn't age.
It hasn't aged at all, in fact.
Well, it's kind of a
timeless love story.
So you would hope
that it wouldn't.
Yeah, your films, both
the ones you've directed
and the ones you've
produced, they
remind me a little bit
of Peter Weir's work.
Ah.
Well, first of all, that's
an incredible compliment.
Well, yeah.
That's an incredible
compliment.
"Picnic at Hanging Rock" and--
I actually tried to get
Peter Weir for years.
"Picnic at Hanging Rock"
and "Last Wave," which are
his two first Australian
films, are, I think,
two of the most unsung
incredible movies.
And then Peter went on
to do "The Truman Show,"
and a lot of other films.
Which is another great film.
And I tried to
get Peter for years
to make "What Dreams May Come."
I mean, I'm a huge
Peter Weir fan.
But he said, I don't
know how to do it.
It was a huge challenge.
And that's a whole other story.
Well, it was a huge challenge.
I mean, I can't even
imagine how you did that,
because I read the book before.
And I was like,
this is impossible.
And usually, Matheson
books aren't impossible.
They're very cinematic.
But you picked that book, and
you managed to pull it off.
Well, it took 20 years.
We probably had every
studio and every director
in Hollywood turn it down
two or three different times.
Spielberg was interested even.
Spielberg was
interested at one point.
And I explained that
story in the book.
It didn't work out
for various reasons.
And we just kind of went on.
And it took 20 years.
And finally, the right
confluence of things
came together for us
to be able to make it.
And it was a very
challenging thing.
Vincent Ward, who's a
wonderful New Zealand director,
was brave enough to
take on the film.
And when you say to
a director you've
got to actually
show an afterlife
and show several different
afterlife experiences
and make them feel real.
And that's why Peter
Weir, who was really
lovely during the
years said to me,
I don't know how to do this.
I mean, I love the story.
I just frankly don't know
visually how to do this.
And Vincent, who had made some
wonderful films in Australia
and in New Zealand,
that were somewhat
art films, when I
first saw him actually
turned the film down twice.
And then he called one day.
And he said, I have
figured out how to do it.
And we sat down
with him, Ron Bass,
who had written the
screenplay, and I and Vincent.
And he said, I want to
make the wife a painter.
And I also want to make
her a curator at a museum,
because this whole after
world life can be wet paint.
And he will be the only
kind of live thing in it
that isn't blended
in with wet paint.
And he went into this
incredible description of what
this world would be like.
And I remember Ron Bass and
I were sitting there just
with our tongues hanging out.
And we said, my god,
Vincent, that sounds great.
Do you know how to do that?
He said, hell no.
But we'll figure it out.
And that's one of the great
things about filmmaking.
You don't know
what you're doing.
He didn't know how to do it.
But he figured it out.
Yeah, I would say
that that's probably--
Stanley Kubrick, I asked him
once, what's your job title?
He said, problem solver.
I just go from one problem
to another all day long.
He's also one of my favorite
directors of all time.
Yeah, he is my
favorite director.
He also said that
being a director
is like being the
waiter at a Jewish deli.
Salami, yes.
Mustard, no.
You know what I mean?
All you do is you're
just making thousands
of decisions every day.
That's true.
Having directed a couple of
films myself, that is true.
You make-- and it's something
that people don't understand.
Oh, you just show up, and
you work with the actors.
You make literally hundreds,
if not thousands, of decisions
every day about everything.
And it's a fascinating job.
I mean, it's a really
interesting, fascinating job.
I have to say that producing
and directing "Conversations
with God," the film version
of "Conversations with God"
was the most fun I've
ever had in business ever.
I mean, my family, to me,
that's the most important thing.
But in my film career,
that was the most fun,
because Neale Donald Walsch
was a dear friend of mine.
He entrusted that to me.
I know you're a friend
of Neale's as well.
And it had been such a
great story, another film
that I'd wanted to
get done for 10 years.
And we finally figured out
how to be able to do that
and actually how
to make the film.
And that 25 days of shooting--
25-day shoot?
-25 days of shooting,
-That's short.
---was the most fun and
is a film, again, that did
not do well when it came out.
And it didn't.
But it's a film that I'm
very, very extremely proud of.
It's starting to
come around now.
And people are
going to eventually--
a couple of friends of
mine have said to me,
you know, Stephen, you're
ahead of your time, which
is supposed to be a compliment.
But then another friend
of mine said to me,
you know what being ahead
of your time really means,
Stephen?
I said, what?
He said, you're wrong.
You're wrong.
You're wrong all the time.
It's just some
time in the future,
sometimes people kind
of see it differently.
But don't get yourself into,
oh, I'm ahead of my time.
You're wrong.
So that kind of keeps the
humility in the situation.
If you're one step ahead of
the crowd, you're a genius.
If you're two steps ahead of
the crowd, you're a crackpot.
-Yeah, there you go.
-So there you go.
So then you went from
"What Dreams May Come,"
which I don't know
if it was a big hit.
But it was a mild hit.
It did well.
It did well enough.
And the movie was
way too expensive.
But it did almost $100 million
around the world in box office.
And it won an Academy Award.
And it was almost-- you
were at the infant of CGI
when that film came out too.
We were.
It was the infancy of it.
So you really
stretched the limits.
And that's what it won
the Academy Award for.
It won for its visual effects.
I mean, it got a standing
ovation when I saw it
at the theater the first time.
It was a really good film.
And then that got you off
onto the spiritual cinema
and a whole new adventure, an
attempt to apply metaphysics
to cinema, which sounds absurd.
But actually, you
think about, movies are
light projected onto a screen.
And you're sitting in the dark.
And movie theaters used to look
like Roman coliseums and stuff.
And there's always been
kind of a mystical aspect
to movie-going.
So it really isn't all that
absurd to think that you could
create spiritual cinema,
spiritual movies that affect
people and maybe even
initiate them even
into higher spiritual concepts.
Well, this is why I got
in the film industry.
I mean, this is
what I wanted to do.
And all kidding aside, I
have known some successes.
I've also known
a lot of failure.
My career has gone south
at least a couple of times.
I had a bankruptcy once,
lost everything that I had
and had some young kids
I was raising on my own.
It was a challenging times.
So I've been through those
dark nights of the soul.
I never really fit into
the whole Hollywood.
Even though I was a
child of Hollywood,
I just never really fit
into the social scene
or the political scene.
And it was our mutual
friend, Neale Walsch,
who actually got me out of LA,
had me move to Ashland, Oregon.
He said, the spiritual
things you want to do,
you can't do when you're
in LA in that industry.
You're going to have
to get out of there.
And I did.
I moved to Ashland.
Neale encouraged me to write
a book about spiritual movies,
which I argued about with him.
And I said, I'm not an author.
I'm not going to
be able to do this.
And finally, one day, he
got really upset with me.
He said, Stephen, you're
going to write this book.
You want to argue
with my source?
And I said, no, sir.
I'll write the book.
So I wrote my first
book, which is
called "The Force is with
You," about mystical movies.
And then I went
around the country,
started talking about it,
and had the vision for doing
something with spiritual films.
And my dear friend Gay
Hendricks and his wife Katie
became really big supporters.
And one day, Gay came to
me and said, hey, listen.
I know you want to do
films, theatrical stuff.
He said, do you think
there are enough really
good spiritual films out
there that we could kind of
do a subscription movie club?
A lot of people
think the Spiritual
Cinema Circle was my idea.
It wasn't.
It was Gay's idea.
And when he said, are there
enough movies out there,
I felt like an actor,
who is asked, hey,
can you ride a horse?
And the answer is of
course I can ride a horse.
Are there enough
movies out there?
Of course there are
enough movies out there.
And that in the end of 2003,
and then in March and April
of 2004, was the launching of
the Spiritual Cinema Circle
here at Gaiam, which we're now
going to start our 10th year.
We have subscribers in
every state of the union,
in about 80 foreign countries.
And we send out
four movies a month.
And they're all inspirational
and powerful and uplifting.
And we have discussions,
which we shoot
in this studio, every month.
And it's really an
extraordinary thing in my life.
It is really what I think
my life has been really
leading to, which is being able
to distribute these movies that
have been made by other people.
And we've distributed over 400
films now to our subscribers
into our community.
So I want to urge
you, if haven't looked
at the Spiritual
Cinema Circle website,
spiritualcinemacircle.com,
please do.
It's wonderful having
it hear at Gaiam.
Gaiam's been very supportive
since Gaiam bought
the company a few years ago.
And it's really been a wonderful
experience and continues to be.
So what's your criteria
for a spiritual film?
What are you looking for?
Well, first of all, we've had
a lot of issues with the word
spiritual, because a lot of
people in mainstream society
consider the word spiritual
and religious to be synonymous.
And when we say spiritual,
we mean of the human spirit.
We mean, we don't do anything
that's denominational.
We won't do anything
that is critical of
or supportive of any
particular religious faith,
but movies that really kind
of exalt the human spirit.
For us, it's really a
difficult thing to pin down,
but movies that make you
feel better about being
human after the film is
over than when it started,
and movies that show who
we can be as humanity when
we operate at our very best.
This is usually three
shorts and a feature,
sometimes a documentary.
And the criterion
that we have for that
is not that it just
be pollyannaish,
because, boy, we've done some
tough subject matter-- child
abuse.
We did a film about
someone who had
inadvertently run
over their own child
and killed their own child.
I mean, we don't do things that
are just necessarily light,
although we do do
comedy as well.
But there has to be
a pathway through it.
And we don't do
anything that's violent
that would be more than PG-13.
We don't do anything
gratuitously sexually.
It's starting to
sound like Gaiam TV.
Well, you know,
they're synergistic.
So you know it should.
I mean, it should
be a part of that.
And the films that
we put out are
films that every
month we really feel
will make people feel better.
And I think if people
go to the Facebook page
for Spiritual Cinema
Circle, they're
going to see our subscribers
talking about the films
every month.
And I have a filmmaker
come in and a subscriber
come in every month and
discuss the films with me.
And we get wildly different
opinions of things.
And I think it's a
wonderful little oasis
of uplifting and
transformational films
for people.
-Yeah, it is.
And it's a needed thing to
have right now in this world
that we're in, which there
aren't a whole lot of films
that fit that description.
Maybe I must have missed
some of these films,
because I watch a lot of films.
And most of them do not
make me feel better when
I'm done watching the film.
Well, that's--
the wonderful thing
for us is that there are so many
movies out there that get made.
Shorts get made
because one person
has a passion to make them.
And they have very
few outlets for them.
And we've now gotten to a
place where a lot of people
are making shorts for us,
because they know that we're
a distribution outlet for them.
And there are a lot of features
that get made that, as you well
know, don't get distribution.
The sad fact of
making movies today
is that one out of every
200 movies that gets made
makes its way into a theater.
One out of 200.
And because of that, they
have to make their money back
from various deals,
including licensing it
to us at the Spiritual Cinema
Circle for the one month
that we put it out or
for digital rights,
which we make available
to them, which
is a wonderful distribution
platform to distribute
through Gaiam TV, which is
another wonderful thing we
can now offer to people.
And the films, I think,
surprise people every month,
because they've
never heard of them.
I've never heard of them
when I take a look at them.
And they're with actors
a lot of the time--
sometimes we have
recognizable actors.
A lot of times, not.
But they're films that you
haven't heard a lot about.
So they can still surprise you.
And I think that's one
of the wonderful things
about our movies every month.
Hey, I've never
heard of that movie.
That's cool.
That's a lot of fun, or that's
very touching, or that's
very moving, or it's
very controversial,
or whatever it might be.
No, it's a really
great service.
Over 12,000 films
submitted to Sundance
this year for 150 choices.
-Is that right?
-Yeah.
And so you know,
there's 11,850 films out
there that are probably never
going to get distributed.
And we may never see them.
So you're like a pioneer, going
in and finding these films
and bringing them
out to the audience.
So in your opinion, what's the
most metaphysical or spiritual
film ever made?
Oh my goodness.
Oh my goodness, my goodness.
I'm going to cop out,
because there's no way.
This is like I have this crusade
about the Academy Awards,
saying Best Actor, Best Actress,
which we can talk about.
I just don't think
you can do that.
You can talk about favorite.
For me, in my opinion,
there are a few, because it
just kind of depends.
I can tell you the
one that woke me up,
Interestingly enough, was
"2001, a Space Odyssey."
It woke me up too.
The last 15 minutes,
20 minutes of that film
changed everything for me.
Same here.
That's one of the
most metaphysical,
spiritual, extraordinary
experiences
that's ever put on film.
And I thought, wow.
I saw that when I was
22, Cinerama Dome Theater
on Sunset Boulevard in LA.
That was a great theater.
And it changed
everything for me.
But certainly, "2001" is
the one that got me going.
Yeah, same here.
Very much so.
So what about today?
What movies today do you
think are coming out that are
interesting in that aspect?
Say this year.
So this has been, I
think, surprisingly the end
of the year-- of course, the
first eight or nine months
were pretty grim.
There were a couple of
movies that I loved,
"Hope Springs," which I
think is a wonderful film.
"Best Exotic Marigold
Hotel" is a wonderful film.
But you know, as you and
I are recording this,
we're in that time of
the year where the movies
are starting to come out.
And fortunately, I've been
a member of the Academy
since 1984.
So I get to vote.
And I consider that
a real privilege
to be one of the 6,000 people
to get to vote on the Academy
Awards every year.
Because of that, they send
us all of these movies,
these year-end movies on DVD.
So we get 50, 60, 70 movies in
these last two or three months.
And we're sitting there
busily watching everything
that we can watch.
I still love to go to
theaters to see films.
But my favorite film so far
this year-- and I haven't seen
all the films for
this year yet--
is "Silver Linings
Playbook," which I just think
is an extraordinary movie.
A little bit like a Peter Weir.
It is so original
and so creative.
And--
Good acting.
Great acting.
Bradley Cooper is fabulous.
Jennifer Lawrence is fabulous.
Robert De Niro is the best
I've seen him in years.
It's such an
unusual, unique film.
And it has such a great heart
and such a great sense of humor
and such a great
sense of romance.
And it's a very strange
story about two people who've
been through emotionally
devastating experiences
in their lives, who
basically lost it.
I mean, they basically went
through periods of time
where they really lost
control of their emotions
and everything else.
And they actually
wind up meeting
and helping each other heal.
And it's just a great film.
I love that film.
I loved "Argo."
-"Argo?"
I haven't seen "Argo."
I thought "Argo" was
a fascinating movie.
I thought that was great.
There are some movies
that haven't come out yet
that I want to kind
of alert people
to-- "A Late Quartet," which is
with Christopher Walken playing
somebody who's not crazy,
which is something different,
and Philip Seymour Hoffman,
which is about a string
quartet in New York, which is
very much about what happens
when you're a great artist
and age catches up to you,
and you can no longer do what
you've done your entire life.
You know, it's a
very powerful movie.
And it's a beautiful movie.
I recommend that
to people a lot.
I loved the James Bond film.
I thought that was great.
I loved "Lincoln."
I think "Lincoln" is wonderful.
I think that Daniel Day Lewis
is going to win the Academy
Award for Best Actor.
Although, I think it
should be favorite actor.
Yeah, let's talk about that.
Yeah, this is
something that I waged
a crusade with in the Academy.
And I must say, I've had
absolutely no success,
you know.
That's because they
want it to be best.
I think I'm two steps ahead.
I'm the crackpot on this one.
-You are.
No success.
Because to me it's
like saying, OK,
what's the best
painting in the Louvre?
Oh, the Van Gogh is
better than the Manet.
You can't say that.
It's what moves you.
So I can't every year vote for--
And what time that you
saw it to, your mood and--
Absolutely.
So I can't any year say, well,
this was the best performance.
Come on.
How are you going to compare
Daniel Day Lewis playing
Abraham Lincoln to
Bradley Cooper playing
somebody who's just been through
this emotional experience
in his life?
You can't.
-It's not even fair.
-It's not fair.
And by the way, there's a lot
of politics in the Academy.
There's a lot of
jealousy in the Academy.
People don't always vote for
what they think is the best.
And one of the most recent
examples I can give you--
and I think it's a great way
to kind of synopsize this--
is that a couple of years ago
James Cameron was nominated
for Best Picture for "Avatar."
Now, "Avatar" is one of
the game-changing movies
of the last 100 years.
It's definitely "The Jazz
Singer" of the 21st century.
It's exactly that.
Yeah, it's exactly that.
It is exactly "The Jazz
Singer" of the 21st century.
That's a great way to put it.
For those of you who don't
know, "The Jazz Singer"
was the first talking film.
And you know that's
an achievement on film
that nobody in the
world could have done--
Or will ever do again.
---or will ever do again.
I mean, an extraordinary thing.
So he gets nominated.
But they don't like him.
But let's remember
that's also the biggest
grossing film of all time.
And it bumped the
other film that
was the biggest grossing
film of all time, "Titanic,"
also made by James Cameron.
So he's now made the two biggest
grossing films of all time.
He gets nominated for Best
Director and doesn't win.
Who wins?
His ex-wife, whose
name-- and I'm sorry.
I'm blanking on the name.
Bigelow.
Yeah, Katherine Bigelow.
But I'm trying to remember
the name of the film.
"The Hurt Locker."
"The Hurt Locker," thank you.
A very vicious film.
Yeah, and "The Hurt Locker"
five years from now--
and I'm not taking
anything away from--
I'm with you all
the way on this.
OK.
Five years from now,
nobody's going to know
what "The Hurt Locker" was.
You and I have a hard time
remembering the name of it.
"Avatar" is going
to stand forever.
But the Academy was not going
to give him the Academy Award
with all of the other things.
And you know, it's
happened in the past.
And I don't remember the year.
John Wayne made the
last film of his life
and won the Academy Award
the same year that Dustin
Hoffman made "Midnight Cowboy."
And of course, they were going
to give it to John Wayne.
I mean, of course they were.
Elizabeth Taylor
won for "Butterfield
8," which was probably her worst
performance in her worst film.
But she had just been
through her tracheotomy
and through all the tragedies.
And they wanted-- so it happens.
You know, so there's
a lot of politics.
But still, that
being said, to me,
movies are such an
incredible art form.
I'm honored to be
a part of that.
I'm honored to be a
part of that industry.
And even though that they don't
always go the way that maybe
people think we
should go-- and I
kind of wish that the
Academy Award show
were no longer on ABC.
I wish it was on basic
cable or something
like that, so they didn't
have to worry about ratings.
This year they're
having Seth MacFarlane,
who is the guy behind
"Ted," host it,
because they want
to get 15-year-olds.
And listen, I have
a 16-year-old.
OK.
We have six kids, my
wife and I. I have
nothing against 16-year-olds.
I love them.
I love you, Carter.
But it's not the
entire audience.
And Academy Awards
is about class.
It's about dignity.
It's about movies that
we want to represent us
around the world as being
the best or the most
favorite of our art form.
And I wish we could get back.
I wish we could get back
to that time in which
it was really just
about the performances
and the accomplishments
and things like that.
But unfortunately, ratings
and money and all of that
have kind of swept it away.
Well, that's a sad note
to end this discussion,
because I have nothing but high
hopes for Hollywood and movies.
Me too.
And I hope that good
movies continue to be made.
Me too
And thanks for stopping
in with us Stephen Simon,--
Me too.
Let's do it again.
---the producer and director.
And I'm Jay Weidner.
And thanks for watching.
And we will do it again.
[MUSIC PLAYING]